# Reliability

## What is reliability?

**Reliability**, $R$, is the probability that a service will consistently perform its intended functions without failure for a specified amount of time. $R$ measures how the service performs under varying operating conditions.

We often use **mean time between failures (MTBF)** and **mean time to repair (MTTR)** as metrics to measure the reliability of a system.

$$ MTBF = \frac{\text{Total elapsed time - Sum of downtime}}{\text{Total number of failures}} $$
$$ MTTR = \frac{\text{Total maintenance time}}{\text{Total number of repairs}} $$

We strive for a **higher MTBF** and a **lower MTTR**.

> There are many variations of the MTBF metric, such as **mean time to failure (MTTF)**. Usually, we use MTTF instead of MTBF for those cases where a failed component is replaced due to irreparable problems: for example, a bad disk of failed bulb which require replacement.

Perfect reliability is often impractical or prohibitively expensive. Instead, designers aim for a level of reliability that balances user needs, cost constraints, and other system requirements.

## Reliability and availability

Reliability is closely related to availability, but focuses on the system's ability to operate correctly than just being accessible.

Reliability and availability are two important metrics to measure the compliance of services to agreed-upon **service level obectives (SLOs)**.

> A service-level objective (SLOs) is a key element of a service-level agreement (SLA) between a service provider and a customer. SLOs are agreed upon as means of measuring the performance of the Service Provider and are outlined as a way of avoiding disputes between two parties.

The measurement of **availability is driven by time loss**, whereas **reliability is measured by frequency and impact of failures**.

Both are essential because they enable stakeholder to assess the health of a service.

Reliability and availability are two distinct concepts but are related: mathematically, $A$ is a function of $R$. **The value of $R$ can change independently, but a change in reliability will impact the availability.**

We use both of them (reliability and availability) in different contexts. For example, storage vendors often quote MTTF for their disks. Most online services use **uptime** (as a measure of availability) in their SLAs. For example, the uptime of AWS EC2 virtual machines is 99.95%.