# Maintainability

## What is maintainability?

**Maintainability** refers to the ease with which a system can be modified to correct faults, improve performance, or adapt to a changed environment. It's a crucial characteristic that impacts the long-term viability and cost-effectiveness of a system.

Maintainability is about managing complexity and change. **A highly maintainable system is designed with clarity and modularity, making it easier for developers to understand, update, and extend the system over time**.

We can further divide the concept of maintainability into three underlying aspects:

**1. Operability:** the ease with which we can ensure the system's smooth operational running under normal circumstances, and achieve normal conidtional under a fault.
**2. Lucidity:** refers to the simplicity of the system or codebase. The simpler it is, the easier it is to understand and mantain it, and vice versa.
**3. Modifiability:** the capability of a system to easily integrate new, modified and unforseen features.

## Measuring maintainability

The measure $M$, maintainability itself, is the **probability that the service will restore its functions within a specified time of fault occurence**. It measures how conveniently and swiftly the service regains its normal operating conditions.

It gives us insight into the ssytem's capability to undergo repairs and modifications while it's operational.

We use **mean time to repair (MTTR)** as a metric to measure $M$:

$$ MTTR = \frac{\text{Total maintenance time}}{\text{Total number of repairs}}$$

In other words, MTTR is the average amount of time required to repair and restore a failed component. We strive to have the value of MTTR as low as possible.

